# Evolution-Pattern-Analysis-of-Haze-Pollution-Episodes
Evolution Pattern Analysis of Haze Pollution Episodes over the North China Plain using Constrained Dynamic Time Warping and Multiway Principal Component Analysis
Haze pollution episodes happened over the North China Plain (NCP) repeatedly during last decade, though annual average PM2.5 concentrations of the city groups in NCP has been reduced significantly along the implementation of China’s Air Pollution Prevention and Control Action Plan. Dynamic time warping (DTW) distance is employed to calculate the dissimilarities of different episodes happened from 2013 to 2017 in the NCP area. Then, a multiway principal component analysis (MPCA) method based on the constrained DTW is carried out to identify different evolution stage of each episode automatically. Contribution rates of meteorological factors and other air pollutant to the fluctuation of PM2.5 are also calculated. 1238, 845 and 949 episodes occurred in Beijing, Tianjin and Shijiazhuang, in which average PM2.5 concentration reached to 154.76 μg/m3, 151.03 μg/m3 and 221.10 μg/m3, are used to develop the model. Results show that each episode consists of an early formational stage, an accumulation stage, a steady stage, and a clearing stage. Contribution rates of meteorological factors and precursors illustrate that NO2 played the most important role (60.53%) in heavily haze pollution episodes happed in Beijing; Mean value of SO2 contribution rate are 1.82 times of NO2 in all stages of haze pollution events in Shijiazhuang; in episodes dominated by local emissions, contribution rate of SO2 only takes 65.62 percentages of NO2, and it is 1.61 times of SO2 in episodes dominated by regional transportation and severe weather conditions together in Tianjin. As the contribution rate of PM2.5 precursors were higher than that of the meteorological factors in early formational stages, emission reduction of 24 hours before the accumulation stages would have a better effect on air pollution mitigation.
